Add release process doc (#137)
lsst-ts/ts_logging_and_reporting: doc/release-process.md

# Nightly Digest Release & Deployment Process

## Overview

The Nightly Digest application is composed of a front end ([ts_logging_frontend](https://github.com/lsst-ts/ts_logging_frontend)) and a back end ([ts_logging_and_reporting](https://github.com/lsst-ts/ts_logging_and_reporting)) that are tagged separately and deployed together in multiple Kubernetes environments for Rubin Observatory. New features are tested at usdf-rsp-dev.slac.stanford.edu/nightlydigest and our production environments are usdf-rsp.slac.stanford.edu/nightlydigest, Rubin's internal Base Test Stand and Summit, and a future public deployment.

## Prerequisites & Access

Code contributions and git tag creation are accepted from members of the [lsst-ts github organization](https://github.com/lsst-ts).
Edits to [ts_cycle_build](https://github.com/lsst-ts/ts_cycle_build) & associated Jenkins workflows require elevated permissions.

> Access to Base Test Stand and our summit deployment requires summit software team membership.

Reviewer: And VPN access 💡

2. Create Pull Request - Ticket author creates a Pull Request into `develop` branch
   1. Draft PRs indicate they are not ready to be tested or reviewed
3. Automated CI check - Tests and builds are sent to Jenkins & report pass/fail back to Pull Request

## Create Dev Release

4. Determine what kind of release you'd like to create based on the type of changes you'd like to release.
   1. `alpha` release — use when work has not been merged to `develop`.
      1. Tag the head of the target branch.
      2. If releasing changes from multiple branches, create a release branch (`alpha-release`) to merge, resolve conflicts, and tag from that branch.
   2. `release candidate (rc)` — use when changes are merged into `develop` but require further integration testing.
      1. Tag `develop` with an `rc` marker, e.g. `vX.Y.Z-rc.N`.
   3. `production` release — use when changes are ready to promote to `main` and deploy to production.
      1. Follow the production release process below.

See [Versioning from TSSW Developer Guide](https://tssw-developer.lsst.io/development-guidelines/versioning.html) for how to tag different releases.

> Note: Often we create production and alpha releases for the backend ([ts_logging_and_reporting](https://github.com/lsst-ts/ts_logging_and_reporting)), to remove some tests that are unable to run in our automated environment due to packaging availability (`lsst-resources` in particular is not conda packaged)

Reviewer: Should be removed after merging https://github.com/lsst-ts/ts_logging_and_reporting/pull/142 🚀 .

- If the fix is quick (< 1 day) create a hotfix and release the new changes into production.
- If the fix or process of debugging tends towards a longer term (> 1 day) [roll back production](#rollback-production-deployment).

However, if the issue creates abnormal load on any of the data sources we query or our infrastructure, no matter how quick the fix, rollback immediately.

### Rollback Dev Deployment

Follow the steps in [Deploy Dev Release](#deploy-dev-release) by rebuilding the target tag in Jenkins. Continue from there, redeploying the previous tag to the dev environment.

### Rollback Production Deployment

Follow the steps in [Deploy to Production](#deploy-to-production) starting with updating the Phalanx environment files back to the previous cycle revision tag. (i.e. c0043.006 -> c0043.002 or whichever the previous stable revision number was)

## References

### Phalanx

We use [Phalanx](https://phalanx.lsst.io/) to define our Kubernetes configurations and [deploy in internal environments](https://phalanx.lsst.io/developers/helm-chart/index.html).

### Cycle Build

> The Rubin Summit Software team deploys software to the summit through a [cycle build process](https://ts-cycle-build.lsst.io/) to control and coordinate compatibility between the different components of the observatory control system. The Nightly Digest is not a core package, and can be [updated in revisions](https://ts-cycle-build.lsst.io/user-guide/user-guide.html#building-a-new-revision).

Reviewer: I think the "summit" part is not relevant in this section, RSSW uses the cycle build to deploy updates in any environment we own, not just summit.
```suggestion
The Rubin Summit Software team deploys software through a [cycle build process](https://ts-cycle-build.lsst.io/) to control and coordinate compatibility between the different components of the observatory control system. The Nightly Digest is not a core package, and can be [updated in revisions](https://ts-cycle-build.lsst.io/user-guide/user-guide.html#building-a-new-revision).
```

Whenever a core component of the control system is released we begin a new cycle to align the rest of the core packages.

- Nightly Digest is not a core package and therefore does not drive new cycles but can be updated via revisions.

> - We are included in the cycle build process because we deploy to the summit

Reviewer: I don't think this is accurate, maybe just remove this statement?

The `ts_cycle_build` repository holds the package versions and dockerfiles for packages included in this process.

When Nightly Digest releases a new version, we coordinate with the Summit Software team via Slack to understand the status of the current revision, update that revision branch in `ts_cycle_build`, and create our associated images through Jenkins.

> This process builds two images, one with a cycle tag (c0045) and one including the revision tag (c0045.002). We use the less specific tag (cycle only, c0045) for our dev deployments, and the further specified (cycle & revision c0045.002) for production

Reviewer: This might not be relevant anymore with the automatic CI (semi-automatic one). I would rephrase this to something like:

```suggestion
This process builds an image that includes the cycle and revision in its tag (e.g. c0045.002). This tag is updated through phalanx when rolling updates to prod.
```

# Nightly Digest Release & Deployment Process

## Overview

The Nightly Digest application is composed of a front end ([ts_logging_frontend](https://github.com/lsst-ts/ts_logging_frontend)) and a back end ([ts_logging_and_reporting](https://github.com/lsst-ts/ts_logging_and_reporting)) that are tagged separately and deployed together in multiple Kubernetes environments for Rubin Observatory. New features are tested at usdf-rsp-dev.slac.stanford.edu/nightlydigest and our production environments are usdf-rsp.slac.stanford.edu/nightlydigest, (sometimes Rubin's summit cluster), and a future public deployment.

> - potentially we should not put the full url to our internal deployments here

Reviewer: Yeah, just mentioning the environments should be enough, i.e. Summit and BTS.

Author: Oh, here I meant the usdf locations to be the internal deployments, but I'll add Summit and BTS by name

## Prerequisites & Access

Code contributions and git tag creation are accepted from members of the lsst-ts github organization.
Edits to [ts_cycle_build](https://github.com/lsst-ts/ts_cycle_build) & associated Jenkins workflows require elevated permissions.
Access to Base Test Stand and our summit deployment requires summit software team membership.
Edit permissions to [Phalanx](https://github.com/lsst-sqre/phalanx) requires group membership.
Access to usdf-rsp locations requires at least a [SLAC](https://s3df.slac.stanford.edu/#/get-started) account.
Access to public deployment locations requires EPO permissions.

## Steps

### 1. Feature Development

1. Implement Ticket - Create Ticket branch, implement changes
2. Create Pull Request - Ticket author creates a Pull Request into `develop` branch
3. Automated CI check - Tests and builds are sent to Jenkins & report pass/fail back to Pull Request

> - < how should we indicate to each other that our PR is ready for deployment to dev environment? >

Reviewer: If a PR is not ready for test deployment it should be marked as **WIP**. No WIP PR should be reviewed by others and a PR not in WIP can be reviewed by anyone without explicit request.

A PR should be deployed (through an alpha release) only after explicit confirmation at our weekly meeting.

Anything merged to develop is assumed ready to be deployed/tested at any time.

Author: Instead of *WIP* how do you feel about using Draft PRs, and only moving them out of the draft state when they are ready to be tested.

Reviewer: yep sounds good :+1:

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I like having a PR marked as a draft if it is not ready for dev deployment. That makes it super clear.

   1. Currently we indicate during weekly meeting
   2. Comment on PR 'Ready for Dev deployment'?
   3. Comment on the ticket?
   4. Something else?

### 2. Create Dev Release

- When automated, should this section run per PR?

>   - Would each new PR need to be rebased on top of the most recently dev-released unmerged PR, or would each overwrite previously tested PR to each test individually?

Reviewer: For the automated process I'm thinking on having a semi-automatic process: once a PR is merged to develop (each author needs to solve rebase conflicts before merging) it triggers a image build with a generic tag, so then at our deployments we permanently point to e.g.: `ts-dockerhub.lsst.org/nightlydigest-frontend:develop` and we (as deployers) should only need to take care of bouncing pods, this could be an easy command like:
```
kubectl delete pods -n nightlydigest -l app.kubernetes.io/instance=nightlydigest-nginx
```
We can evaluate the possibility of fully automating this by injecting ArgoCD credentials in our Jenkins pipelines.

Also note this process would not require tagging, not even alpha tags. We should only tag when we are confident a set of changes are stable enough, this should still be a manual process. Its up to the criteria of the releaser when "a set of changes are stable enough", no need to think it a lot, we can always put hot fixes.

This will force us to a basis of "merge the PR if you want to test", which I think is good. This might end up creating more hotfix PRs, but I think that's good too. I envision this would improve the speed up of feature development (at least testing).

Reviewer: Att @rbovill 💡 .

Reviewer 2: Knowing when a set of changes are stable enough will definitely be helped by us having increased coverage in our tests. Most/all of our bugs/hotfixes lately have been for UI components that don't yet have E2E tests, so the bugs weren't caught.

2. Tag `develop` branch so unreleased work may build on top of that (if PRs have been merged into `develop` branch and it has not been tagged)
3. Create or update release branch - integrate all selected PRs from step 4 onto the same branch
   1. If only one PR, the release branch can be the ticket branch.
   - Merging work on a release branch can cause difficult merge or rebase issues sometimes.
4. Create release notes - run towncrier notes & `make_release.py` for front end (updates `package*.json`)

> 5. Alpha tag - Create alpha tags (`v1.2.3-alpha.1`) on both front end and back end release branches

Reviewer: I would rephrase this into two possible paths:

a) You are creating an alpha release -> you want to deploy not merged-to-develop changes. If deploying just 1 branch, tag the head of the same branch. If you are merging different branches, consider using an `alpha-release` branch for convenience where you merge everything, resolve merge conflicts and tag from there.

b) You are creating a release candidate (rc) -> you want to deploy changes already merged to develop, but for some reason you are not confident on creating a normal release so you tag the head of develop and mark it as release candidate (rc tag).

Note we can potentially push full releases to dev (not alpha, not rc, full release as in merging develop to main and tagging from there). However the most common case is for alpha tags. We should add some memo about why we always deploy alpha from the backend (due to the lsst-resrouces situation).

We should reference versioning docs from the TSSW developer guide: https://tssw-developer.lsst.io/development-guidelines/versioning.html.

### 3. Deploy Dev Release

> 8. Point `ts_cycle_build` current revision to new development tags - follow `ts_cycle_build` release documentation to update and run builds

Reviewer: We should reference ts_cycle_build docs.

9. Deploy on Base Test Stand & test new features
   1. Follow the Phalanx documentation to bounce Kubernetes pods

>    - Do we still need to test here?

Reviewer: Some quick tests are good, just a visual inspection that no page breaks. This is strict reponsibility of the deployer to look for hot fixes that prevent components rendering as long as possible.

Further debugging and bug finds from anyone should be materialzied as jira tickets.

Author: So we do still need to test on base test stand to check that all of the components render ✅ I will add some of the specifics too

10. Deploy on usdf-rsp-dev & test new features

>    1. Follow the Phalanx documentation to bounce Kubernetes pods

Reviewer: Reference phalanx deployment documentation please.

11. Announce in #osw-logging for people to test

### 4. Test Development Deployment

11. Test the deployed changes on usdf-rsp-dev per code review
12. Identify & communicate bugs to the PR author (PR comments or #osw-logging channel)

>     - How should we communicate not to release to production if a bug is merged into `develop` branch?

Reviewer: For bugs associated to merged PRs, that should be materialized as new Jira tickets referencing the old one (that potentially introduced the bug). For bugs associated with open PRs I prefer documenting the issue in the respective Jira ticket and additionally leaving a (shorter) note on the PR pointing to the details in the ticket.

>     - How should we communicate not to release to production if a bug is merged into `develop` branch?

Reviewer 2: Create a ticket and post+tag deployer(s) in #osw-logging?

Author: @sebastian-aranda hadn't added his comment before yours, but I agree to put the technical details in the ticket, and reference via a comment in the PR. 
I think for the #osw-logging channel we should have this for active discussion if it is unclear which ticket or PR the change is associated with (?)

13. Push bug fixes to the PR

>     - We don't redeploy on dev environment usually after bug fix

Reviewer: No need to inmediately re-deploy a hot fix unless its extremely urgent (e.g. hammering some operational DB) for dev deployments. Things can remain semi-broken in dev from one week to another (once after the bug has been potentially fixed).

>     - We don't redeploy on dev environment usually after bug fix

Reviewer 2: No, not usually, but we do if there is another dev deployment before that PR is merged to develop.

14. Approve & Merge PR into `develop` branch

### 5. Create Production Release

1. Check on step 12.1. first before continuing with the production release (bugs merged to not release)
2. Merge `develop` branch into `main` branch
3. On `main` create the release notes & git tag
    1. Create release notes and update internal metadata - Run towncrier in the back end & `make_release.py` in the front end

>     2. Create production tags - on `develop` branch, create a git tag (`v0.1.2`) to include most recent PRs

Reviewer: Why it says `on develop branch` here? Full release tagging must always happen from `main` (after release notes and internal metadata is updated).

Author: Ope, because it's a typo!

4. Create PR & merge `main` back into `develop`

### 6. Deploy to Production

> 3. Await automated Conda build for the back end image to be created via Jenkins - automatically initiated with new git tags

Reviewer: This is also required for the Dev-deployment, but here aren't details about this in that section.

> 4. Add new tags to current `ts_cycle_build` revision - Follow the `ts_cycle_build` documentation

Reviewer: Please reference respective ts_cycle_build documentation page.

>    2. Update the Kubernetes values files to reference the new revision -- follow Phalanx documentation

Reviewer: I suggest to add more details here about how OSW cycles work, how we are tied to them, what we need to check (e.g. cycle upgrade in progress), etc.

Also could be good to indicate here why we need to explicitly update revisions here and in dev not, i.e. every image build pipeline triggers two images, one with only cycle tag (e.g. `c0045`) for dev deployments and one with full cycle+revision (e.g. `c0045.001`) for production.

Author: I am adding this to the ##References heading with a note to see that section. Please also review that to make sure I don't have any misunderstandings! 🙏

5. Deploy the new images to the production environments (usdf-rsp, summit, <public>) by bouncing the Kubernetes pods
6. Test out the deployments to spot check for errors
7. Announce in #osw-logging for users

### Hot Fix process

> - We don't have a process for this

Reviewer: Yes, we don't have hotfix procedure, but we should consider this just like another release. If you have a quick fix you want to test before merging, let's just make an alpha tag. If you are certain your quick fix is fine, just merge it to develop and then make a normal full release (no alpha, no rc).

Author: Great; I added that note and info to the section!

## Rollback

> - What is a big enough issue to require a roll back?

Reviewer: As I said before, is fine that things are broken at dev, unless there is something leaving the app 100% (even 50% would be a reasonable thresshold) unusable, then we need to rollback. For dev rolling back is harder because we need to build the image again on top of the existent cycle tag -> updating the ts_cycle_build revision tags and then building the image again through Jenkins pipelines. Rolling back for prod is easier as it is just updating phalanx values to point to the previous revision that was working.

> - What is a big enough issue to require a roll back?

Reviewer 2: Ooo good question. Maybe we break ~ something ~ and one of these conditions are met:
 a) the usual hotfix investigation process does not reveal what caused the breakage, or
 b) the fix will require more time than acceptable for a hotfix implementation, or
 c) the fix would essentially undo the set of changes applied, so we may as well roll them back.
I'm not sure how big or important a broken ~ something ~ it would need to be.

Reviewer: The process should be separated in dev & prod. I see it like this:

- If we find a hotfix that doesn't take more than 1 day, let's go for it in dev & prod. Prod as priority, dev if time allows.
- If the hotfix cannot be implemented fast then:
    - For dev we leave it as it is, no need to rush, it can remain broken for a week IMO.
    - For prod, we should evaluate how disruptive is the change.
        - If the change affects 1 full page, e.g. the full context-feed page, we should roll back.
        - If the change affects only a small feature, e.g. collapse/expand cells in the context-feed table, we could just leave it there if the fix will be ready in less than a week timeframe (we don't have that much user traffic, so is not like we will have tons of users complaining for a specific feature).
        - Anything broken between a small feature and a full page can be quickly discussed?
 
If the bug is something like "we are getting 1000 requests per second in ConsDB database, please stop", then we roll back inmediately, no matter if it is dev or prod.

Author: Thank you for this detail! I did my best to incorporate that into this section.
